First-MVC series: Model & DB tutorials: MT, improve readability and fix issues (#22173)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/tutorials/first-mvc-app/adding-model.md

From the **Tools** menu, select **NuGet Package Manager** > **Package Manager Console** (PMC).

![PMC menu](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/adding-model/_static/pmc5.png)

<!-- When https://dev.azure.com/devdiv/DevDiv/_workitems/edit/1320544 is fixed, we can remove the following install package instruction for Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Design  -->

In the PMC, run the following command:

```powershell

> Install-Package Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.Design

Reviewer: Why is this step missing from https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/tutorials/razor-pages/model ?

Author: Maybe related to the version available at the time?  I'm not sure.  I can't compile and run this one without it.  We will have to create an issue for the Razor-pages tutorial if it is a problem.

 
```

The preceding commands add:

* The EF Core SQL Server provider. The provider package installs the EF Core package as a dependency. More packages are installed automatically in the scaffolding step, later in the tutorial.

> * The utilities used by the packages installed automatically in the scaffolding step, later in the tutorial.

Reviewer: Fix

### Use SQLite for development, SQL Server for production

When SQLite is selected, the template generated code is ready for development. The following code shows how to inject <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Hosting.IWebHostEnvironment> into `Startup`. `IWebHostEnvironment` is injected so `ConfigureServices` can use SQLite in development and SQL Server in production.

[!code-csharp[](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/start-mvc/sample/MvcMovie3/StartupDevProd.cs?name=snippet_StartupClass&highlight=3,5,10,16-28)]

---

<!-- End of tabs                  -->

<a name="scaffolding-created"></a>

Scaffolding creates:

* A movies controller: *Controllers/MoviesController.cs*.
* Razor view files for Create, Delete, Details, Edit, and Index pages: `Views/Movies/*.cshtml`.
* A database context class: *Data/MvcMovieContext.cs*.

The automatic creation of these files is known as *scaffolding*.

The scaffolded pages can't be used yet because the database doesn't exist. Running the app and selecting the **Movie App** link results in a *Cannot open database* or *no such table: Movie* error message.

<a name="dc"></a>

### Examine the generated database context class and registration

> A database context class is needed to coordinate EF Core functionality (Create, Read, Update and Delete) for the `Movie` model. The database context is derived from [Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.DbContext](xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.DbContext) and specifies the entities to include in the data model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With EF Core, data access is performed using a model. A model is made up of entity classes and a context object that represents a session with the database. The context object allows querying and saving data. The database context is derived from [Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.DbContext](xref:Microsoft.EntityFrameworkCore.DbContext) and specifies the entities to include in the data model.
```

Scaffolding creates the *Data/MvcMovieContext.cs* database context class:

[!code-csharp[](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/start-mvc/sample/MvcMovie3/zDocOnly/MvcMovieContext.cs?name=snippet)]

> The preceding code creates a [DbSet\<Movie>](/dotnet/api/microsoft.entityframeworkcore.dbset-1) property that represent collections of the specified entities in the database context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The preceding code creates a [DbSet\<Movie>](/dotnet/api/microsoft.entityframeworkcore.dbset-1) property that represents the movies in the database.
```

> ASP.NET Core is built with [dependency injection (DI)](xref:fundamentals/dependency-injection). Services, such as the EF Core DB context, must be registered with DI in `Startup`. Components that require these services are provided these services via constructor parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ASP.NET Core is built with [dependency injection (DI)](xref:fundamentals/dependency-injection). Services, such as the database context, must be registered with DI in `Startup`. Components that require these services are provided these services via constructor parameters.
```

In the *Controllers/MoviesController.cs* file, the constructor uses [Dependency Injection](xref:fundamentals/dependency-injection) to inject the `MvcMovieContext` database context into the controller. The database context is used in each of the [CRUD](https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Create,_read,_update_and_delete) methods in the controller.

Scaffolding generated the following highlighted code in `Startup.ConfigureServices`:

# [Visual Studio](#tab/visual-studio)

[!code-csharp[](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/start-mvc/sample/MvcMovie3/Startup.cs?name=snippet_ConfigureServices&highlight=5-6)]

# [Visual Studio Code](#tab/visual-studio-code)

[!code-csharp[](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/start-mvc/sample/MvcMovie3/Startup.cs?name=snippet_UseSqlite&highlight=5-6)]

# [Visual Studio for Mac](#tab/visual-studio-mac)

[!code-csharp[](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/start-mvc/sample/MvcMovie3/Startup.cs?name=snippet_UseSqlite&highlight=5-6)]

---

> The name of the connection string is passed to the context by calling a method on a [DbContextOptions](/dotnet/api/microsoft.entityframeworkcore.dbcontextoptions) object. The [ASP.NET Core configuration system](xref:fundamentals/configuration/index) reads the "MvcMovieContext" database connection string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [ASP.NET Core configuration system](xref:fundamentals/configuration/index) reads the "MvcMovieContext" database connection string.
```

<a name="cs"></a>

### Examine the generated database connection string

Scaffolding added a connection string to the *appsettings.json* file:

# [Visual Studio](#tab/visual-studio)

[!code-json[](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/start-mvc/sample/MvcMovie3/appsettings.json?highlight=10-12)]

# [Visual Studio Code / Visual Studio for Mac](#tab/visual-studio-code+visual-studio-mac)

[!code-json[](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/start-mvc/sample/MvcMovie3/appsettings_SQLite.json?highlight=10-12)]

---

For local development, the [ASP.NET Core configuration system](xref:fundamentals/configuration/index) reads the `ConnectionString` key from the *appsettings.json* file.

<a name="migration"></a>

> ## Initial migration

Author: @Rick-Anderson, I could use some clarity on what you want to happen here.   You want to move the ## Initial Migration section to right after building the app.   By "building the app" do you mean the next section where we build/run the app?  That happens in the "Test the app" section in its first line.  However you then say append "Test the app", so the best assumption I have at what you intend doesn't seem to make sense.  Sorry to ask for more clarity. I appreciate the suggestion.

> ## Initial migration

Reviewer: Yes, they should build the app, initial migration, then test it. No need to examine the code before you run the code. Move all the examine the code after they've run the code.

> ## Initial migration

Author: @Rick-Anderson:  Maybe you meant move "The InitialCreate class" section to right after building the app?  That makes sense.  It doesn't make sense to me to move "Initial migration" so I know I must be misunderstanding something.  By "building" the app do you mean "build/compile/run" which occurs in the "Test the App" section, if not, give  a line number or text or something that indicates where "right after building the app" is.  Sorry to ask and take up so much time. Thanks for your help.

> ## Initial migration

Author: ...maybe just give me a line number where you want Initial migration to go to.  Then I can figure out where I am misunderstanding the suggestion.

---

Build the project as a check for compiler errors.

## Scaffold movie pages

Use the scaffolding tool to produce `Create`, `Read`, `Update`, and `Delete` (CRUD) pages for the movie model.

# [Visual Studio](#tab/visual-studio)

In **Solution Explorer**, right-click the *Controllers* folder **> Add > New Scaffolded Item**.

![view of above step](adding-model/_static/add_controller5.png)

In the **Add Scaffold** dialog, select **MVC Controller with views, using Entity Framework > Add**.

![Add Scaffold dialog](adding-model/_static/add_scaffold5.png)

Complete the **Add MVC Controller with views, using Entity Framework** dialog:

* In the **Model class** drop down, select **Movie (MvcMovie.Models)**.
* In the **Data context class** row, select the **+** (plus) sign.
  * In the **Add Data Context** dialog, the class name *MvcMovie.Data.MvcMovieContext* is generated, select **Add**.

> ![Add Data context](adding-model/_static/dc5.png)

Author: @Rick-Anderson, thanks for the suggestion.  I must be missing something on the issue here, or maybe we just don't agree on what is clearer.
I think the current one is better.  We had some confusion around this step and screenshot in the past from folks if I remember right.  Thanks for the suggestion, but I feel we need to keep the update and it is clearer.
The instruction is clearer, and the screenshot now highlights the actual items that are selected.  Here is what is in the PR right now.
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/10985336/118558644-cca07580-b71b-11eb-8ed5-da352481bb0c.png)

> ![Add Data context](adding-model/_static/dc5.png)

Reviewer: So add both images. It's a two step process and your image doesn't show what's presented.

> ![Add Data context](adding-model/_static/dc5.png)

Author: OK, thanks, I will spit what I did into two images, one per step.

> ![Add Data context](adding-model/_static/dc5.png)

Author: Resolved in 834e774.  Ended up using 3 screenshots since there are 3 steps and a 2nd dialog.

export PATH=$HOME/.dotnet/tools:$PATH
```

Run the following command:

```dotnetcli
dotnet-aspnet-codegenerator controller -name MoviesController -m Movie -dc MvcMovieContext --relativeFolderPath Controllers --useDefaultLayout --referenceScriptLibraries -sqlite

```

[!INCLUDE [explains scaffold generated params](~/includes/mvc-intro/model4.md)]

<a name="sqlite-dev-vs-mac"></a>

### Use SQLite for development, SQL Server for production

When SQLite is selected, the template generated code is ready for development. The following code shows how to inject <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Hosting.IWebHostEnvironment> into `Startup`. `IWebHostEnvironment` is injected so `ConfigureServices` can use SQLite in development and SQL Server in production.

[!code-csharp[](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/start-mvc/sample/MvcMovie3/StartupDevProd.cs?name=snippet_StartupClass&highlight=3,5,10,16-28)]

---

<!-- End of tabs                  -->

<a name="scaffolding-created"></a>

Scaffolding creates:

* A movies controller: *Controllers/MoviesController.cs*
* Razor view files for Create, Delete, Details, Edit, and Index pages: `Views/Movies/*.cshtml`
* A database context class: *Data/MvcMovieContext.cs*

> The automatic creation of these files is known as *scaffolding*.

Reviewer: Scaffolding updates Startup, appSetting.json, and the project file.  anything else?

Author: @Rick-Anderson,  will put in what you suggested, but will move this section to tabs.
I had assumed the reason you originally kept this list to just the files created was that you were applying it to all three tabs, and it was too much detail for here.  VS does it all for scaffolding, but VS Code requires steps you take in addition to running dotnet aspnet-codegenerator controller.  So in the VS Code context I will list what scaffolding creates, but I need to exclude updates to appsettings.json for the connection string etc.  which were done manually, and not by scaffolding.

Author: Resolved with e5c4187

Scaffolding creates the *Data/MvcMovieContext.cs* database context class:

[!code-csharp[](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/start-mvc/sample/MvcMovie3/zDocOnly/MvcMovieContext.cs?name=snippet)]

The preceding code creates a [DbSet\<Movie>](/dotnet/api/microsoft.entityframeworkcore.dbset-1) property that represents the movies in the database.

ASP.NET Core is built with [dependency injection (DI)](xref:fundamentals/dependency-injection). Services, such as the database context, must be registered with DI in `Startup`. Components that require these services are provided these services via constructor parameters.

In the *Controllers/MoviesController.cs* file, the constructor uses [Dependency Injection](xref:fundamentals/dependency-injection) to inject the `MvcMovieContext` database context into the controller. The database context is used in each of the [CRUD](https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Create,_read,_update_and_delete) methods in the controller.

Scaffolding generated the following highlighted code in `Startup.ConfigureServices`:

# [Visual Studio](#tab/visual-studio)

> [!code-csharp[](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/start-mvc/sample/MvcMovie3/Startup.cs?name=snippet_ConfigureServices&highlight=5-6)]

Reviewer: Format code to prevent horizontal scroll bar on tablets 85 characters wide. You can simulate tablets by viewing in a browser of the maximum width that doesn't have left or right panes (TOC's).. 

![Uploading image.png…]()

Reviewer: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3605364/118339627-1b000b00-b4b5-11eb-8591-b251a24dd218.png)

Reviewer: two spaces should work

Reviewer: Get into the habit of testing code formatting to prevent horiz scroll bar.

### The InitialCreate class

Examine the *Migrations/{timestamp}_InitialCreate.cs* migration file:

[!code-csharp[](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/start-mvc/sample/MvcMovie5/Migrations/20201107014924_InitialCreate.cs?name=snippet)]

In the preceding code:

* `InitialCreate.Up` creates the Movie table and configures `Id` as the primary key.
* `InitialCreate.Down` reverts the schema changes made by the `Up` migration.

## Dependency injection in the controller

Open the *Controllers/MoviesController.cs* file and examine the constructor:

<!-- l.. Make copy of Movies controller (or use the old one as I did in the 3.0 upgrade) because we comment out the initial index method and update it later  -->

[!code-csharp[](~/tutorials/first-mvc-app/start-mvc/sample/MvcMovie22/Controllers/MC1.cs?name=snippet_1)]

The constructor uses [Dependency Injection](xref:fundamentals/dependency-injection) to inject the database context (`MvcMovieContext`) into the controller. The database context is used in each of the [CRUD](https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Create,_read,_update_and_delete) methods in the controller.

Test the **Create** page. Enter and submit data.

> [!NOTE]

> > You may not be able to enter decimal commas in the `Price` field. To support [jQuery validation](https://jqueryvalidation.org/) for non-English locales that use a comma (",") for a decimal point and for non US-English date formats, the app must be globalized. For globalization instructions, see [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs/issues/4076#issuecomment-326590420).

Reviewer: Move this up where you first have them run it.

Author: Resolved with bcd3060

---

Build the project as a check for compiler errors.

## Scaffold movie pages

Use the scaffolding tool to produce `Create`, `Read`, `Update`, and `Delete` (CRUD) pages for the movie model.

# [Visual Studio](#tab/visual-studio)

In **Solution Explorer**, right-click the *Controllers* folder **> Add > New Scaffolded Item**.

![view of above step](adding-model/_static/add_controller5.png)

In the **Add Scaffold** dialog, select **MVC Controller with views, using Entity Framework > Add**.

![Add Scaffold dialog](adding-model/_static/add_scaffold5.png)

Complete the **Add MVC Controller with views, using Entity Framework** dialog:

* In the **Model class** drop down, select **Movie (MvcMovie.Models)**.

> ![Add Data context](adding-model/_static/dc5.png)

Reviewer: Delete this and combine with the next. They don't need a screen shot for this.

* In the **Data context class** row, select the **+** (plus) sign.

![Add Data context select plus](adding-model/_static/dc5_plus.png)

> * In the **Add Data Context** dialog, the class name *MvcMovie.Data.MvcMovieContext* is generated, select **Add**.

Reviewer: This is getting way too verbose. Look at https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/tutorials/razor-pages/model?view=aspnetcore-5.0&tabs=visual-studio#scaffold-the-movie-model and do the same thing. We've had no complaints following that.
